---
title: "Security and Risk Management"
date: 2024-08-01 00:00:00
categories: [Modules, SRM]
tags: [SRM, risk management, threat models, quantitative risk models, DR solutions]
author: tobi
---

## Content of this module

* Discuss the difference between qualitative and quantitative risk assessments.
* Describe how to carry out both kinds of assessments.
* Explain what is meant by and how to create threat models.
* Demonstrate how to create quantitative risk models.
* Discuss and design DR solutions.


## Unit 1: An Introduction to Security and Risk Management
What is a risk? In this first session for our new module, our class was introduced to new students from the cybersecurity course, where we learned that there are different definitions for the term risk. Douglas Hubbard (2020) says risk is: "A potential loss, disaster, or other undesirable event measured with probabilities assigned to losses of various magnitudes." Furthermore, we were informed about our first assignment, which will be a group task, where we will be doing a risk assessment for a brick-and-mortar business which is thinking about an online presence. On top of that I conducted the formative assignment, a [collaborative discussion](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module2_Security_and_Risk_Management/Collaborative%20Learning%20Discussion.pdf) about risk assessment frameworks in relation to Industry 4.0.

 
## Unit 2: Users, Assessments and the Risk Management Process
This week I started to setup my ePortfolio, which will be reviewed and graded by the end of the module. It is my first-time using GitHub, hence it takes some time for me, but I eventually figure it out. Since our first assignment will be a group task, we were all assigned to a group. As a start, I setup a team meeting to discuss and fill out our group contract, which we will send to our tutor. I was assigned the meeting manager role, which includes setting up reoccurring team meetings. We all agree to kick off this assignment by answering questions from the case study. I also continued with the collaborative discussion, where I submitted [two feedbacks](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module2_Security_and_Risk_Management/Collaborative%20Learning%20Discussion.pdf) to posts from my fellow students. The question arises if traditional risk assessment frameworks are still valid in a digital world.
 
 
## Unit 3: Introduction to Threat Modelling and Management
In week 3 I have learned basic concepts of different threat modelling frameworks such as STRIDE & DREAD, CVSS, Attack Trees, PASTA and OWASP. In our group assignment I laid hands on my first actual risk assessment. I was tasked to do a risk assessment for the brick-and-mortar store, which focused on inventory management, as well as supply chain management. Apart from that I wrote my [summary post](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module2_Security_and_Risk_Management/Collaborative%20Learning%20Discussion.pdf) for the collaborative learning discussion where I referenced to Bone and Lee (2023) who argue that traditional risk management approaches are outdated and inadequate for the new challenges presented by the digital era. Therefore, they introduced a "Cognitive Risk Framework" that integrates the human element into risk management strategies, emphasising the importance of understanding and addressing human behaviour and cognitive biases as critical factors in mitigating risks.


## Unit 4: Application of Threat Modelling and Management Techniques
As a preparation for this week's seminar, we were tasked to read about different threat modelling frameworks and take them into practice with different examples which you can find [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/tree/main/Module2_Security_and_Risk_Management/AttackTree). We were asked to use the Threat modelling Manifesto, the OWASP Threat modelling Cookbook and the ATT&CK libraries as a basis. Furthermore, we held our weekly group meeting to catch up on each other's tasks as well as assigning new tasks for the upcoming week.


## Unit 5: An Introduction to Security and Risk Standards in Industry and the Enterprise
General data Protection Regulation (GDPR), Europe’s data and privacy and security law, was the main topic for this unit. According to [gdpr.eu](https://gdpr.eu/what-is-gdpr/) it is the toughest privacy and security law in the world. There are the following seven principles for the lawful processing of personal data

1. **Lawfulness, fairness and transparency** — Processing must be lawful, fair, and transparent to the data subject.
2. **Purpose limitation** — You must process data for the legitimate purposes specified explicitly to the data subject when you collected it.
3. **Data minimisation** — You should collect and process only as much data as absolutely necessary for the purposes specified.
4. **Accuracy** — You must keep personal data accurate and up to date.
5. **Storage limitation** — You may only store personally identifying data for as long as necessary for the specified purpose.
6. **Integrity and confidentiality** — Processing must be done in such a way as to ensure appropriate security, integrity, and confidentiality (e.g. by using encryption).
7. **Accountability** — The data controller is responsible for being able to demonstrate GDPR compliance with all these principles.

As a formative activity, we had to choose a case study in relation with mishandling of personal data and answer questions about it. You can find my case study [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module2_Security_and_Risk_Management/Unit5-CaseStudy.pdf).

On top of that, we were also tasked to create a Wiki post to our learning platform, which discusses various IT security frameworks and their applicability to different industries. You can find my post [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module2_Security_and_Risk_Management/Unit5-WikiPost.pdf).

As for the group assignment, we had our weekly group call, where we assigned new tasks to each member which will be due by next Monday. We are slowly reaching a point, where all tasks are done, all questions are answered but now we need merge them together into one file.


## Unit 6: The Practical Implications of Security and Risk Standards
As we approach the deadline of our group assignment, in which we were tasked to do a risk assessment and threat modelling for a brick-and-mortar business, including recommendation for a possible adoption to an e-commerce strategy, this week's focus was mainly about completing our assignment and filling out the peer reviews, where we had to grade our fellow group members. You can find all content which our group has developed [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/tree/main/Module2_Security_and_Risk_Management/GroupAssignment).

Furthermore, there was an activity to carry out, which was discussed in our weekly seminar. It was about security standards such as GDPR, PCI-DSS and HIPAA in relation to the business that we worked on in our group assignment. Security standards are needed for several reasons, including the prevention from misusing customer data, uniformity (all organisations follow the same rules), protection against threats, and more. You can find my activity [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module2_Security_and_Risk_Management/Unit6-SecurityStandards.pdf).


## Unit 7: An Introduction to the Concepts of Quantitative Risk Modelling
Rigaud et al. (2024) say: "The overall aim of quantitative risk assessment as broadly defined can be described as the quantification of the population impact of any type of factor, exposure, policy or program, hypothesized or already present."
To get a deeper understanding of quantitative risk models, we were tasked to put our hands on two well-known models, Monte Carlo Simulation and Bayes theorem. You can find my spreadsheet with the Monte Carlo Simulation [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module2_Security_and_Risk_Management/Unit7-montecarlo.xlsx). For the Bayes theorem, the task was to visit Allen Downey’s Think Bayes 2 and go through the first two chapters. I decided to do them in PyCharm, since that IDE was still installed on my computer from another assignment. Unlike Jupiter Notebook, PyCharm does not have an interactive mode but a scripting mode. Therefore, I had to use the print statement to make the results visible. You can find my solutions [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module2_Security_and_Risk_Management/Unit7-probability.py) and [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module2_Security_and_Risk_Management/Unit7-bayes.py).
There was also another collaborative learning discussion in which we had to read a paper, written by Spring et al. (2021) and answer the following two questions:
* 1. What characteristics of CVSS do the authors criticise? Do you agree with the critique? Justify your answer with academic references.
* 2. The authors also discuss a number of alternatives to CVSS. Select one of these alternatives and post an argument for why it should replace CVSS.

Please find my post which I have made to the student forum [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module2_Security_and_Risk_Management/Collaborative-Learning-Discussion2.pdf).


## Unit 8: Implementing Quantitative Risk Models
In this Unit we looked at how to implement quantitative risk models to real world problems. However, since we received our grades for the group project earlier this week, this week's seminar was mainly about discussing the feedback we got as well as the grading system for such projects. There was also an ad-hoc voting where students were asked whether they prefer individual or collective grades for group project. I was not surprised, that all the present students voted for individual grades.
As usual, we continued with our collaborative learning discussion where I submitted two peer responses to my fellow students. You can find my responses [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module2_Security_and_Risk_Management/Collaborative-Learning-Discussion2.pdf).

Furthermore, we were tasked to answer questions regarding quantitative modelling which you can see [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module2_Security_and_Risk_Management/Unit8-Seminar-Activity.pdf) and on top of that we laid hands on an actual Monte Carlo simulation. The Task was to read through chapter 5 of the book called Enterprise risk management models, written by David L. Olson and Desheng Wu (2020). From there we had to adapt their example regarding an inventory system and figure out the best reorder point as well as the order quantity. We did that using the [YASAI](https://sites.rutgers.edu/yasai/) Excel add-in, which is a free add-in for Monte Carlo simulations, created by MSIS Department of Rutgers Business School. You can find my calculations, as well as my solution [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module2_Security_and_Risk_Management/Unit8-SeminarActivityPartB.xlsx)


## Unit 9: Risk, Business Continuity and Disaster Recovery
Risk mitigation also includes the creation of plans for scenarios in which the normal operation of processes and systems is no longer possible. This means every business should have a detailed plan with steps which need to be undertaken, once they face a service disruption or even worse, a total outage. This plan must of course be tested on a recurring basis so that it can be used immediately in the event of a disaster. In this week's Unit, we have learned the following four key aspects on this topic:
* **Business Continuity (BC)** is about keeping the business running during a disruption.
* **Disaster Recovery (DR)** focuses on recovering systems and data after a disaster.
* **Recovery Time Objective (RTO)** defines how long the business can tolerate downtime.
* **Recovery Point Objective (RPO)** defines how much data loss is acceptable in terms of time.

I have also created a summary post in the Collaborative Discussion Forum. You can look it up [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module2_Security_and_Risk_Management/Collaborative-Learning-Discussion2.pdf).


## Unit 10: Practical Applications and Issues in DR Implementations
Cloud solutions and Cloud Service Providers (CSP) have been on the rise in the last few years. The competition between CSP's is stiff, hence they have a strong interest to keep their customers. One way of doing this is through a lock-in which Pellegrini et al. (2017) define as: "A vendor lock-in makes customers dependent of a propriety product, service or technology provided by a vendor. In terms of cloud services, it is achieved by providing and developing services that are platform-dependent with proprietary technologies, interfaces or formats." Therefore, it is crucial for businesses to know how to avoid such lock-ins. Opara-Martins et al. (2014) wrote a critical review of vendor lock-in an its impact on adoption of cloud computing. You can see my findings regarding possible mitigations based on this paper in [this document](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module2_Security_and_Risk_Management/Unit10-Seminar-ActivityA.pdf).
Furthermore, as a preparation for this week's seminar, I have created a PowerPoint presentation, which shows disaster recovery (DR) solutions for different scenarios with different Recovery Point Objectives (RPO) and Recovery Time Objectives (RTO). You can find my slides [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module2_Security_and_Risk_Management/Unit10-Seminar-ActivityB.pdf).


## Unit 11: Future Trends in Security and Risk Management
The main focus in this Unit was our second assignment. Based on the first assignment where we had to create a risk assessment for Pamperet Pets, a pet food manufacturer with world-famous quality products as well as recommendations regarding an e-commerce strategy, we were now tasked to put two newly learned topics to practice. First, we had to carry out qualitative risk modelling for the dimensions of availability and quality. Pampered Pet's customers were concerned after the company decided to take advantage of a global supply chain. Therefore, I decided to model these concerns using Monte Carlo simulation. The second stage was to create a disaster recovery solution with specific requirements from a key stakeholder.
 
My work can be found [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module2_Security_and_Risk_Management/Assignment2/TobiasZeierExecutiveSummary-141024.pdf). The Monte Carlo simulation used for the risk modelling can be found [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module2_Security_and_Risk_Management/Assignment2/TobiasZeierMCS-141024.xlsx).


## Unit 12: The Great Debate: What will be the most influential trend in SRM in the next 5 years?
In the final seminar of this module, each student was tasked with delivering a [presentation](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module2_Security_and_Risk_Management/Unit12-Seminar-Activity.pdf) on what they believe will be the most influential trend in security and risk management (SRM) over the next five years. This exercise encouraged us to think critically about the future in this field. After each presentation, we engaged in a brief but insightful discussion about the various trends and perspectives presented. Following the discussion, we had the opportunity to vote on the trends mentioned. This voting process not only determined the collective opinion of the class but also highlighted which trends resonated most with my peers. I was quite surprised to find that the majority of students believed that Risk Maturity Models (RMM), presented by myself, would be the most influential trend in the coming years, primarily because the other presentations discussed the involvement of AI, which is a hyped topic at the moment.
 
As this unit comes to a close, I find myself reflecting on the journey of the past twelve weeks. This marks the end of my second module as part of my MSc in Enterprise IT Management. The workload has been more intense compared to the first module and, at times, exhausting, but the experience has been incredibly rewarding. I have gained a wealth of new knowledge, explored various frameworks, and been introduced to numerous aspects of SRM.
 
Looking back, I am filled with a sense of accomplishment and satisfaction. The successful completion of this module feels like adding another crucial piece to the puzzle of my academic and professional development. As a final assignment, we have been tasked with completing our e-Portfolio and writing a reflection on this module which can be found [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module2_Security_and_Risk_Management/TobiasZeierModuleReflection-211024.pdf).
 