---
title: "Information Technology Service Management"
date: 2024-10-22 00:00:00
categories: [Modules, ITSM]
tags: [ITSM, requirements, ITSM principles, ITSM processes]
author: tobi
---

## Content of this module

* Understanding of the concepts of information technology service management (ITSM).
* Understanding of the basic principles, processes, and procedures of ITSM.
* Understanding of how ITSM principles and techniques impact equality, diversity, and inclusion in the workplace.
* Understanding of how functional and non-functional requirements map onto ITSM processes.
* Understanding of the relevant standards and legislation which impact ITSM.
* Appreciation for current and future challenges, limitations, and opportunities in this field.
* Ability to present critical arguments for specific actions or outcomes to a diverse audience.
* Opportunity to reflect on and evaluate their personal development, and the ethical, social, and professional impact of ITSM principles and techniques.


## Unit 1: Introduction to Information Technology Service Management (ITSM)
In this Unit we had our first seminar where we got to know our new tutor. We have learned about the basic concepts of ITSM such as:
 * Service Catalog
 * Service Level Management
 * Incident Management
 * Problem Management
 * Change Management
 * Asset Management
and more. We were tasked to submit a post to the discussion forum, where the question was: “How does understanding the definition, importance, and key concepts of IT Service Management (ITSM) contribute to effective service delivery and organisational success?” You can find my post [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module3_Information_Technology_Service_Management/Unit1-ForumPost.pdf).


## Unit 2: Information Technology Service Management Principles and Processes
This week there was a lecturecast to complete. It elaborated further on the fundamental principles of ITSM. As a formative activity, we were tasked to read in our core ebook, “Delivering ITSM for Business Maturity: A Practical Framework” written by Beverly Weed-Schertzer (2019) as well as two papers regarding incident management and the effectiveness of IT service management capability. This laid the basis to complete the case study where we were confronted with a delicate situation in a fictional company. iTech Corporation, a leading provider of IT Services, faces challenges egarding the efficiency and effectiveness of incident management processes, leading to increased resolution times and customer dissatisfaction. You can find my reflective journal post, where I solved the case study, [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module3_Information_Technology_Service_Management/Unit2-ReflectiveJournal.pdf).


## Unit 3: Information Technology Service Management Frameworks and Standards
My main task this week was our first assignment. For this assignment, we had to design a Configuration Management Database (CMDB) tailored for IT Security Management. The design was focused on managing security assets, vulnerabilities, compliance requirements, and access controls.
The task was divided into two phases: the **Design Phase**, where I had to analyse requirements and develop the CMDB's architecture, and the **Demonstration Phase**, where I had to describe features and usability. This assignment allowed me to demonstrate my ability to create a design document. You can find my work [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module3_Information_Technology_Service_Management/TobiasZeierCMDB_Design-111124.pdf).


## Unit 4: Information Technology Process Automation and DevOps
This week, I learned about the importance of automation in IT Service Management (ITSM) and how it helps overcome the challenges of manual processes. We explored various automation tools and technologies, including workflow platforms, DevOps tools, and emerging Industry 4.0 technologies like IoT, AI, and machine learning. You can find my reflective journal entry of my learnings [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module3_Information_Technology_Service_Management/Unit4-ReflectiveJournal.pdf). Furthermore, I prepared this [document](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module3_Information_Technology_Service_Management/Unit4-SeminarPrep.pdf) for this week's seminar. It shows different career paths within ITSM and possible certification.


## Unit 5: Future Trends in Information Technology Service Management
In this Unit, we learned about the transformative role of emerging technologies in IT Service Management (ITSM). We explored how blockchain, edge computing, quantum computing, and cloud computing are shaping the future of ITSM, along with their benefits and challenges. The unit also covered the implications of cloud computing for ITSM, especially in hybrid and multi-cloud environments. I gained insights into next-generation ITSM platforms, including AI-driven solutions and predictive analytics. This knowledge has deepened my understanding of how these advancements drive innovation and enhance service delivery.


## Unit 6: Capstone and Project Presentations
As this module concludes, it is time for our final assignment. Based on our design document submitted earlier in this module as our first assignment, we had to create an actual CMDB for IT security management. After evaluating different tools, I decided to use ServiceNow, as it offers a Personal Developer Instance (PDI) where one can start building applications from scratch without setting up a whole environment or installing any software. You can find my assignment [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/tree/main/Module3_Information_Technology_Service_Management/Assignment2).
