---
title: "The use of an e-Portfolio"
date: 2024-04-22 00:00:00
categories: [Modules]
tags: [e-Portfolio, MSc, Study]
author: tobi
---

## The use of an e-Portfolio
Hello everyone,

In my role as the head of two DevOps teams at a local bank in Zurich, it is one of my responsibilities to hire new engineers whenever there is a demand. Therefore, I have seen many e-portfolios within job applications. I view them as a great addon to a candidate’s resumé since they show examples of actual work which has been done by them. Furthermore, it lays out the skills and the range of experiences that a candidate brings with them. 

“ePortfolios can be used as a powerful marketing tool to display evidence of needed knowledge and skills for employment (Lu, 2021).”
Up until now I thought that an e-portfolio would only be useful for actual engineers since they can insert their coding projects and show their skills as well as their passion for coding (e.g. by showing some pet projects). On a second thought I have come to the point that creating an e-portfolio for me as a manager would be equally beneficial to show my own collected skills and experiences as a manager as well as specific projects which I have directed.

I look forward to creating my own e-portfolio on GitHub and start to collect evidence work which has been done by me. It will be a steep learning curve since I have no experience with neither an e-portfolio nor GitHub. 


**Reference:**
Lu, H.S. (2021) The implementation of E-Portfolios in an online graduate program. European Journal of Open Education and E-learning Studies 6(2):167-180. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.46827/ejoe.v6i2.4021

