---
title: "IT Project Management"
date: 2025-01-28 00:00:00
categories: [Modules, EIPM]
tags: [EIPM, project management, methods, agile, gherkin, wbs, gantt]
author: tobi
---

## Content of this module

* Understanding of the concepts of information technology project management (ITPM).
* Understanding of the basic principles, processes, and procedures of ITPM.
* Understanding of how functional and non-functional requirements map onto ITPM processes.
* Understanding of the relevant standards and legislation which impact ITPM.
* Understanding of how people management and organisation impacts ITPM.
* Appreciation for current and future challenges, limitations, and opportunities in this field.
* The ability to present critical arguments for specific actions or outcomes to a diverse audience.
* The opportunity to reflect on and evaluate their personal development.

## Unit 1: Introduction to Enterprise IT Project Management
In this unit, I gained a solid foundation in IT project management by exploring its core concepts and definitions. Through analysing documented major IT project failures, I learned to identify common causes such as poor planning, inadequate risk management, and misaligned stakeholder expectations. This unit highlighted the importance of understanding these pitfalls to mitigate risks effectively in future projects. Furthermore, I have learned about different project methods and their advantages as well as their disadvantages. There was a formative activity, which was a post to the student's forum where we had to start with the phrase “The project failure that best demonstrates the need for ITPM is...”. You can find my post [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module4_IT_Project_Management/Unit1-3-ForumPost.pdf). On top of that we already started with our first assignment which is a group project. My group met up to negotiate our group contract as well as assigning first tasks.


## Unit 2: Requirements Gathering, Management and Analysis Techniques
This week, I learned about the critical importance of requirements gathering, management, and analysis in project initiation. This phase is foundational to the Software Development Lifecycle (SDLC), and mistakes here can lead to significant issues later on. I discovered that poor requirements management has historically caused project failures, often due to unclear objectives, miscommunication, or insufficient stakeholder involvement. To mitigate these problems, the unit explored various techniques for effectively gathering and managing requirements, such as interviews, workshops, and prototyping. I also found it interesting how the Cucumber framework can assist in requirements management by using Gherkin syntax to create clear, testable scenarios that bridge the gap between technical and non-technical stakeholders. You can find my first try with Gherkin statements [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/tree/main/Module4_IT_Project_Management/Unit2). Since we could submit a forum post last week, it was time for some reactions on my fellow students post. You can find them [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module4_IT_Project_Management/Unit1-3-ForumPost.pdf).


## Unit 3: Project Management Tasks and Techniques
This week in Unit 3, we have learned about the day-to-day responsibilities of a project manager (PM) and the essential tools and techniques they use to manage projects effectively. One key takeaway was understanding the RACI chart, which helps clarify roles and responsibilities within a project team by defining who is Responsible, Accountable, Consulted, and Informed for each task. We also explored the various tools PMs use, such as Gantt charts and risk registers, and how they aid in planning, tracking, and problem-solving. As always, I have submitted a summary post to the discussion forum which you can find [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module4_IT_Project_Management/Unit1-3-ForumPost.pdf). Now the highlight of this week was finalising our group project, we submitted our assignment on time. You can find it [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module4_IT_Project_Management/Unit1-3-ForumPost.pdf).


## Unit 4: Project Management and Risk
In this unit, I have gained a deeper understanding of the crucial role risk management plays in project management. We reviewed the Risk Management Process (RMP) and learned how it helps identify, assess, and mitigate risks to ensure project success. I found it particularly interesting to explore how risks impact the Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC), as it highlighted the importance of addressing potential issues early on to avoid costly setbacks later. Additionally, we discussed various risk mitigation strategies, such as thorough planning, rigorous testing, and accurate estimating, which are essential for minimising uncertainties.


## Unit 5: Future Trends in IT Project Management
In week 5, I have explored the future trends shaping IT Project Management (ITPM), including automation, AI, and remote work, and how they are transforming project delivery. We discussed the challenges these disruptions bring, such as changing roles and faster project demands, and examined mitigation techniques like agile methodologies and improved planning. This unit has given me valuable insights into navigating modern ITPM and preparing for future changes.


## Unit 6: Debate: What is the Most Influential IT Trend That Will Affect IT Project Management in the Next Five Years?
In our final week, we debated which disruptive trends, like AI and automation, will most impact IT Project Management in the next five years. We reviewed student slides, discussed pros and cons, and voted on the most influential trend. You can find our groups slides [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/blob/main/Module4_IT_Project_Management/Unit6-EIPM-FutureTrend.pdf). Surely, the highlight of this week was our final assignment in which we were given new data about the projects from our first assignment. We were tasked to process these updates and provide a recommendation to the client, based on the new situation. You can find my work [here](https://github.com/TobiZeier/UoEO_MSc_EIM/tree/main/Module4_IT_Project_Management/Assignment2).

